my next item on the agenda is this bank
of trees in the middle distance which is
going to push these trees back as they
belong beyond the church it's actually
quite difficult to drag and create a hit
and miss effect so the technique more is
to be sort of stabbing in the paint a
little bit like that where as I said a
little bit stronger there's some almost
neat raw Sienna right now we'll bring
some strong girl to marine blue and
that's just got a little touch of the
permanent Rose out it for a little bit
of variety right now that's nearly dried
why it's been drying I've mixed up a
pinky gray color it's mostly raw Sienna
this color but I've just added a touch
of the permanent rose and a little extra
touch of the ultramarine blue right now
I'm going straight down the Clocktower
I'm just going to fill that in as well
because that's going to be darkened a
little later on and bring that there but
whatever possible once I've got enough
space to play around with the brush I'm
going to just put this color in almost
as if I'm actually laying bricks on the
church now you can see the way that's
working there you can do it very very
quickly which means you can leave little
bits of little highlights it
incidentally the buttress there and that
one there and at 45 degrees to the end
of the church wall and not actually that
way or that way they're actually on an
angle that's why they look the way they
do so I haven't got the perspective
wrong on that honest so you've really
got to keep moving this is one I'm sure
you'll be pleased to know that this is
one exercise I really can't afford to
stop and Yap I've just got to keep
things moving now this buttress is also
on an angle on the main part of the
church building the bottom part will be
in the shadow cast by this wall but this
top pass here will certainly be picking
up some sunlight so we'll paint it
accordingly okay same colors now for the
shadow side of the building only a lot
stronger I'm gonna add some more blue
into this color because I want that and
there is a very definite light against
dark or dark against light with those
background trees right while that's
drying off I'm just going to put some
very pale blue into the windows of the
church here
oh yes and we must put in before I
forget some shadow on that wall or on
that buttress there I'm gonna leave
little bits of highlighted I was gonna
say white paper it's not because the
advantage of covering it earlier with
the raw Sienna means that the highlights
are actually going to be very very warm
not gonna be stark white they're gonna
be quite warm now I explained out the
bristles you can see I can get some
slightly more raggedy effects and just
managing to push enough of that pigment
around there the dark pigment just to
let it blend gently and then we'll just
clear out the space where the rock is
just to make sure it's absolutely shape
we want this we're gonna have that as a
blue gray some blue gray into the shadow
area we still want it reasonably light
so we'll just leave a little bit of
light patch on it now to see the point I
was making before about these branches
just the simple act of putting these
branches across the front of the church
pushes the whole thing back what I'm
just going to try and do is get a few
little leaf clusters stabbed in here and
then I'm gonna have to go back over
these with some darker colour in a
moment or two myself just lift it out a
little bit of that color which it got a
little bit too dark in the bell tower
but as far as the painting goes that's
it
right now I've started doing some of the
pen work but you can see I've done very
little in the background just a hint
here just to put a few louvers in I'm
using the sepia color but nothing too
detailed because the further niacin is
away then the less detail it'll have and
in fact if you put too much pen work in
it's going to bring everything too far
forward the reason it's identity that
I'm using Brown is that I personally
find that the black can at times guess
particularly if you're learning how to
use this it can get a little bit stark I
suggest that if you're going to use
PanAm wash try starting off at least try
using the brown ink because it's a
little bit more rustic it's sort of more
in keeping with the brown colors anyway
on the on the picture and it won't stand
out quite so much if if things don't all
go perfectly to plan right now what I
happened done was to bring some shadows
in here which helps to highlight
everything and lead the eye into this
sort of area here right now you can see
I'm just adding in some of the detail on
the branches and really I'm just
concentrating on the bit of the branches
that I feel would be either in shadow or
would benefit from space strengthened
for example across the front of the
church I hope you can see that by using
hot pressed paper yeah it does take a
little getting used to when especially
when you're putting skies on but you can
see the beautiful way the colors blend
in a very very or surreal way that you
can really exploit this gentle blending
of the colors to create beautiful
effects or incidentally with pen and
wash you don't have to use the pen work
at the end as I've done a lot of artists
actually draw the picture with pen
taking with black pen and then fill in
the colors afterwards so I suggest you
don't only have a go a pen and wash in
the styler I've done but try it also
with the drawing done first in pen work
but in the meantime there we are I hope
you've enjoyed that exercise Mellon
Church in pen and wash